---
layout: post
title: "Veganism is Technologically Inevitable"
date: 2019-06-19
---

It's the year 2150. Humanity has mastered spaceflight and developed permanent colonies throughout most of the solar system. The most advanced spacecraft travel at 1/3 the speed of light, and can carry thousands of people for decades at a time. And when those people get hungry, they... go down to the bottom of the spacecraft, find a cow (the most advanced spacecrafts all have cows onboard of course), kill it and make a hamburger out of it. Humanity is able to manipulate matter to the point that nearly any material can be printed from raw atoms and energy - including any food - but they still raise and slaughter animals for food anyway for some reason. Just printing your food from a 3D-printer is too efficient and convenient, afterall.

Of course, this view of a technologically advanced future is absurd. It's no more feasible than future humans lighting their space ships with kerosene lamps, or riding horses to get from one end of their spacecraft to the other (althoug that would be awesome). It's nearly impossible to envision an advanced sci-fi future where we're still raising and slaughtering animals for food, which means that at some point between now and that potential future everyone has become vegan. It doesn't mean nobody is eating meat, but that meat is certainly not going to come from animals. Veganism, in this sense, is inevitable along with technological change.

At some point the sheer inefficiency of raising and slaughtering animals for food must become untenable. Feeding, housing, raising, and then slaughtering an animal is a really round-about process to create a meal. We're already seeing meat alternatives like [Impossible Foods](https://impossiblefoods.com/food/) that are nearly indistinguishable from meat, and [Mosa Meat](https://www.mosameat.com/) is already able to directly grow real cow cells in the lab into meat without raising animals - what will be the impact on society when artificial or lab-grown meat becomes 3x cheaper than raising an animal and slaughtering it? How about when it's 5x cheaper? Or when it's both significantly healthier and engineered to taste even better than animal-based meat? At some point you will have to really go out of your way to get meat from a slain animal. It's not hard to imagine a future where meat from slaughtered animals nearly vanishes, in the same way that people riding horses as a mode of transit in major cities has nearly vanished. At some point, the idea of slaughtering animals for food will be ridiculous. When that happens, Veganism is inevitable.
